Mikeo big pass on protocol details (#26)
liuchunchi/draft-liu-acme-rats: draft-ietf-acme-rats.md

## 'rats' identifier

A new identifier type to indicate client support or server request for remote attestation.
This is a "dummy" identifier in that the `value` does not contain an actual identifier, but instead a property that is the be remotely attested.
The `value` MAY be left empty, or contain a property hint as per {{prophints}}.

type (required, string):
: The string "rats".

value (required, string):
: A string from the  ACME Attest Claims Hint Registry defined in {{prophints}}, which could be the empty string.

A Server MAY issue challenges for multiple "rats" identifiers in the same ACME protocol flow.

The Client MUST complete the challenge by returning a CMW {{-CMW}} which MAY contain remote attestation data in any defined CMW format, including: EAT {{RFC9711}}, WebAuthn (cite), TPM attest_certify (?cite), PKIXKeyAttesation {{I-D.ietf-rats-pkix-evidence}}.
It may contain other RATS conceptual message types such as evidence, endorsement, or attestation result as appropriate for the mode.
This document does not remove the need for vendors to perform interoperability testing with CAs to ensure compatibility.

## remote-attest-01 Challenge {#rats-chall}

> A `remote-attest-01` challenge type asks the Client to prove provide remote attestation. The Client SHOULD use the provided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `remote-attest-01` challenge type asks the Client to provide Evidence appropriate for making a  trustworthiness decision.
The Client SHOULD use the provided
```

The Server MAY include a `attestClaimsHint` containing a list of claims that it would like to see in the

This section describes the challenge/response extensions and procedures to use them.

### remote-attest-01 Challenge Object

The `remote-attest-01` Challenge Object is:

The basic fields `type` (which MUST be "remote-attest-01"), `url`, `status`, `validated` and `error` are preserved from {{Section 8 of RFC8555}} un-modified. The following new fields are added:

freshness_nonce (required, string):
: A randomly created nonce provided by the server which MUST be included in the Attestation Results to provide freshness.
EDNOTE TODO: we should decide whether this nonce MAY / SHOULD / SHOULD NOT / MUST NOT be the same as the ACME nonce or the ACME Challenge URL.

attestClaimsHint (optional, list of string)
: If the Server requires attestation of specific claims or properties in order to issue the requested certificate profile, then it MAY list one or more types of claims from the newly-defined ACME Attest Claims Hints registry defined in {{prophints}}.

verifierEncryptionCredential (optional, string url)

> : A URL where the Client can fetch the encryption public key that it can use for encrypting the rats challenge response.

Author: I was assuming client-side caching to save bandwidth, but maybe that's not a good enough reason?

> : A URL where the Client can fetch the encryption public key that it can use for encrypting the rats challenge response.

Reviewer 2: I agree the key should be sent inband.

The `attestClaimsHint` SHOULD contain values from the "JSON Web Token Claims" registry created by {{!RFC7519}}, in particular claims related to remote attestation as registered in {{!RFC9711}} and related documents, but MAY contain non-registered values. The Client SHOULD attempt to collect evidence, endorsements, or attestation results from its local environment that satisfies these claims, either directly if the local environment supports EAT {{!RFC7519}}, or mapped to the closest equivalent claims in the supported format. The Client MAY ignore any claims that it does not recognize or that it is unable to collect remote attestation for. In other words, the Client SHOULD return what it has rather than failing, and allow the Server to decide if it is acceptable for the requested certificate profile.

> The `verifierEncryptionCredential` is for cases where the evidence contains sensitive data, such as identifiers that could be linkable to a person and therefore qualify as Personally Identifiable Information and the Client wishes to protect it against accidental logging, for example by HTTP proxies, as it passes through the Server's application stack. The design of passing a URL to the encryption public key as part of the `remote-attest-01` challenge object allows the Server to manage multiple verifierEncryptionCredentials, and choose the one appropriate to this certificate request flow. The `verifierEncryptionCredential` URL SHOULD be a semi-static UUID-style URL so that the Client can create a cache of previously-fetched encryption credentials, indexed by the path component of the `verifierEncryptionCredential` URL. The Server MAY, for example, use the public key fingerprint as the path component in the `verifierEncryptionCredential` URL. The referenced credential SHOULD be in the JSON Web Key (JWK) {{!RFC7517}} format, but MAY be in other reasonable formats such as a DER or PEM encoded X.509 certificate.

Reviewer: I think that goes beyond just PII.
It supports the idea that information a server does not have, can't be subpoenaed.

The `verifierEncryptionCredential` is for cases where the evidence contains sensitive data, such as identifiers that could be linkable to a person and therefore qualify as Personally Identifiable Information and the Client wishes to protect it against accidental logging, for example by HTTP proxies, as it passes through the Server's application stack. 
The design of passing a URL to the encryption public key as part of the `remote-attest-01` challenge object allows the Server to manage multiple verifierEncryptionCredentials, and choose the one appropriate to this certificate request flow. 
The `verifierEncryptionCredential` URL SHOULD be a semi-static UUID-style URL so that the Client can create a cache of previously-fetched encryption credentials, indexed by the path component of the `verifierEncryptionCredential` URL. 
The Server MAY, for example, use the public key fingerprint as the path component in the `verifierEncryptionCredential` URL. The referenced credential SHOULD be in the JSON Web Key (JWK) {{!RFC7517}} format, but MAY be in other reasonable formats such as a DER or PEM encoded X.509 certificate.

> EDNOTE: in the name of simplicity, make this "MUST JWK"?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EDNOTE: in the name of simplicity, make this "MUST JWK"?
```

Yes.  Also semi-static UUID-style will need to be explained, or cited.  Maybe the details don't matter, so much as the goal of allowing the client to cache by URL, knowing the URL will change if the contents do.

{{RATSPA}} defines a summary of a local assessment of posture for managed systems and across various  layers.
The claims and mechanisms defined in {{RATSPA}} are a good basis for the assessment that will need to be done in order to satisfy the trustworthiness challenge detailed in this document.

# ACME Extensions

## 'rats' identifier

A new identifier type to indicate client support or server request for remote attestation.
This is a "dummy" identifier in that the `value` does not contain an actual identifier, but instead a property that is the be remotely attested.
The `value` MAY be left empty, or contain a property hint as per {{prophints}}.

type (required, string):

> : The string "rats".

Author: "acmera" instead?

Reviewer: Maybe, merging the acronyms the other way, one could get: "RACMER"
(The Sea (Mer) of Rac)

Author: Maybe "remote-attestation"

{{RATSPA}} defines a summary of a local assessment of posture for managed systems and across various  layers.
The claims and mechanisms defined in {{RATSPA}} are a good basis for the assessment that will need to be done in order to satisfy the trustworthiness challenge detailed in this document.

# Overview

## 'remote-attestation' identifier

A new identifier type to indicate client support or server request for remote attestation.
This is a "dummy" identifier in that the `value` does not contain an actual identifier, but instead a property that is the be remotely attested.

> The `value` MAY be left empty, or contain a property hint as per {{prophints}}.

Reviewer 2: I think setting the value of the "remote-attestation" identifier to #prophints is a interesting design choice which I have been pondering for a while. 

Value-wise: 
Previously and personally if I must give a value to this unique identifier, I would recommend think this value could have 2 choices:

1. the unique identifier of its root of trust. Endorsement Key for example
2. the unique identifier of this device. IDEVID for example (maybe LDEVID would also suffice) 

#prophints provides a different perspective-- it identifies a _type_ of device. The pros is that its for the best finding a granularity balance between identification and privacy. The cons is that, if the SOC wants to do asset identification and management, it may have difficulty seeing all the different devices as individual devices, check for security events and respond one-by-one. Maybe it can do unique identification from other information sources?

I dont have an strong inclination of which option we must choose from, it is just some thinking of the future usage convenience perspective, and how it would affect the best(must) and optional design choices. WDYT?

Process-wise: 
I see #prophints is optionally carried in newOrder Request Object and Order Object ({#new-order-req} and {#new-order-resp}). Would this be sufficient to carry, and in reverse makes carry #prophints in "remote-attestation" identifier unnecessary?

Reviewer 2: again I dont have strong opinion or preset answers-- its just choices with best reasons that we explain to people (possibly in the future LC processes).

type (required, string):
: The string "remote-attestation".

value (required, string):
: A string from the  ACME Attest Claims Hint Registry defined in {{prophints}}, which could be the empty string.

A Client MAY advertize support for multiple "remote-attestation" identifiers in the same ACME protocol flow.

A Server MAY issue challenges for multiple "remote-attestation" identifiers in the same ACME protocol flow. As the Server is authoritative for the requirements to be fulfilled for the given certificate request, the Server MAY choose not to issue a Challenge for every "remote-attestation" identifier type that the Client advertized support for, and conversely, the Server MAY issue a challenge for "remote-attestation" identifiers that the Client did not advertize support for.

> EDNOTE: Is there any reason for the client to include "remote-attestation" identifiers in the newOrder at all?

Reviewer 2: In section {#new-order-req}, it currently says including the "remote-attestation" identifiers would "indicate support for remote attestation". ?

## remote-attest-01 Challenge {#rats-chall}

A `remote-attest-01` challenge type asks the Client to provide Evidence appropriate for making a  trustworthiness decision.
The Client SHOULD use the provided
`freshness_nonce` as an attestation freshness nonce, if the Client's underlying attestation technology supports freshness nonces.

The Server MAY include a `attestClaimsHint` containing a list of claims or specific properties that it would like to see attested.

> The Client MUST complete the challenge by returning a CMW {{-CMW}} which MAY contain remote attestation data in any defined CMW format, including: EAT {{RFC9711}}, WebAuthn (cite), TPM attest_certify (?cite), PKIXKeyAttesation {{I-D.ietf-rats-pkix-evidence}}.

Reviewer 2: forgive me for being pedantic -- why MUST return cmw but MAY have attestation data in CMW format? 
Is attestation data optional or CMW format is optional?

It may contain other RATS conceptual message types such as evidence, endorsement, or attestation result as appropriate for the mode.
Since this specification allows wide flexibility on the contents of the remote attestation data, this document does not remove the need for vendors to perform interoperability testing with CAs to ensure compatibility.

This section describes the challenge/response extensions and procedures to use them.

### remote-attest-01 Challenge Object

The `remote-attest-01` Challenge Object is:

The basic fields `type` (which MUST be "remote-attest-01"), `url`, `status`, `validated` and `error` are preserved from {{Section 8 of RFC8555}} un-modified. The following new fields are added:

freshness_nonce (required, string):
: A randomly created nonce provided by the server which MUST be included in the Attestation Results to provide freshness.

> EDNOTE TODO: we should decide whether this nonce MAY / SHOULD / SHOULD NOT / MUST NOT be the same as the ACME nonce or the ACME Challenge URL.

Reviewer 2: IF the freshness_nonce IS same as ACME nonce (Replay-Nonce in HTTP Header), wouldnt the client just retrieve it from the HTTP header of the previously received Server response?

> The server provides a nonce in the Replay-Nonce header field of every successful response. The client MUST include that nonce in the 'nonce' field of the JWS protected header of its next request

Reviewer 2: Every current Challenge type has a token field.
So the good news is maybe the best design is rename the "freshness_nonce" field to "token", and explain the value of "token" should be used as an attestation nonce. Do not use the previous ACME Replay-Nonce.

The bad news is you cant use this design for AR/passport.... Because the token will only be issued when challenge is created. And badnonce requires the nonce never been used in previous sessions.

attestClaimsHint (optional, list of string)

> : If the Server requires attestation of specific claims or properties in order to issue the requested certificate profile, then it MAY list one or more types of claims from the newly-defined ACME Attest Claims Hints registry defined in {{prophints}}.

Reviewer 2: Would this ACME Attest Claims Hints registry be persistent, iana style, or will it allow more flexible adding? 

While reading this, I jumped to the ACME Attest Properties Hint Registry {#iana-propshints} and got a little confused there. Please refer to my comments in the {#iana-propshints} section

The `verifierEncryptionCredential` is an encryption key in JSON Web Key (JWK) {!RFC7517} format that the Client can use to encrypt the attestation data that it will return.
It is intended for cases where the evidence contains sensitive data the Client wishes to protect it against accidental logging, for example by HTTP proxies, as it passes through the Server's application stack. This could for example include data such as identifiers that could be linkable to a person and therefore qualify as Personally Identifiable Information, or any other detailed type of system measurement that the Client deems sensitive.
The credential SHOULD be in the JSON Web Key (JWK) {{!RFC7517}} format, but MAY be in other reasonable formats such as a DER or PEM encoded X.509 certificate.

> EDNOTE: in the name of simplicity, make this "MUST JWK"?

Reviewer 2: Yes

### remote-attest-01 Response {#attestation-response}

> The HTTP POST body to the challenge URL MUST be a raw JSON or CBOR CMW {{-CMW, Section 5.2}}, base64 encoded as necessary.

Reviewer 2: According to RFC8555, I think JWS is a must for all Client-Server comms. So it might must be a JWS object or a JWE-JWS nested JWT object?

In RFC8555 Section [6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8555#section-6).  Message Transport, it says "Communications between an ACME client and an ACME server are done over HTTPS, using JSON Web Signature (JWS)"

In the example of Section [7.5.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8555#section-7.5.1).  Responding to Challenges, it is a JWS object.

     "expires": "2025-09-30T14:09:07.99Z",

     "identifier": {
       "type": "rats",
       "value": "secure-boot"
     },

     "challenges": [
       {
         "type": "remote-attest-01",
         "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/prV_8235AD9d",
         "status": "pending",
         "freshness_nonce": "yoW1RL2zPBzYEHBQ06Jy",

>          "attestClaimsHint": ["hwmodel", "swversion", "submods", "manifests",],

Reviewer 2: exactly:  rename this field to "token"

if there is no "token", you wont be able to create a keyAuthorization string

| "hsm"            | Attestation that the private key associated with this certificate request is stored in cryptographic hardware such as a TPM or PKCS#11 HSM. In the case of PKCS#11 HSMs, the attestation SHOULD contain the PKCs#11 properties of the private key storage, as well as an indication of whether the cryptographic module is operating in FIPS mode. |
| "measured_boot"    | Attestation from the device's onboard secure-boot stack of the device running the application. |
| "os_patch_level" | Attestation to the version or patch level of the device's operating system.             |
| "sw_manifest"    | A manifest list of all software currently running on the device.                        |
| "fido2"          | A request for FIDO2-based user authentication; maybe this is to validate a user identifier directly against the FIDO2 data, or maybe this serves as a second-factor to the CA's certificate pickup flow. |

In general, the target environment that the Server wants to be remotely attested is the environment where the application is running. The "hsm" property is an exception to this because this wants attestation from the cryptographic module instead.

> 

Reviewer 2: quite some time ago, i kind of remember the way we want to use ACME Attest Properties Hint Registry is to use them as _**templates**_, which I was thinking, it should look like a 6-course meal menu, where for example "HP device requires this set of 6 claims, so please attest them".

I may misunderstood. So some clarification would be appreciated...

If it is not a course-meal menu style, rather it lists all the individual claims, I think the list would go much more longer... Me too is surprised this CMW-associated registry does not exist.
